Skip directly to site contentSkip directly to search
U.S. flag
An official website of the United States government Here's how you know 
CDC Logo
COVID-19
Search COVID-19
Symptoms of COVID-19
Updated Mar. 15, 2024
Español
Print
People with COVID-19 have reported a wide range of symptoms ranging from mild symptoms to severe illness. Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus. Anyone can have mild to severe symptoms. Possible symptoms include:

Fever or chills
Cough
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea
This list does not include all possible symptoms. Symptoms may change with new COVID-19 variants and can vary by person. CDC will continue to update this list as we learn more about COVID-19.

Feeling Sick?
Stay home and away from others (including people you live with who are not sick) if you have symptoms that aren’t better explained by another cause.

Seek health care promptly for testing and/or treatment if you have risk factors for severe illness; treatment may help lower your risk of severe illness.

When to Seek Emergency Medical Attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID 19:

Trouble breathing
Persistent pain or pressure in the chest
New confusion
Inability to wake or stay awake
Pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone
If someone is showing any of these signs, call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility. Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.

*This list is not all possible symptoms. Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.

Difference Between Flu and COVID-19
Influenza (flu) and COVID-19 are both contagious respiratory illnesses, but they are caused by different viruses. COVID-19 is caused by infection with a coronavirus named SARS-CoV-2, and flu is caused by infection with influenza viruses. You cannot tell the difference between flu and COVID-19 by symptoms alone because some of the symptoms are the same. Some PCR tests can differentiate between flu and COVID-19 at the same time. If one of these tests is not available, many testing locations provide flu and COVID-19 tests separately.

Resources

More Information
Healthcare Workers: Information on COVID-19

Archived Content
Search for and find historical COVID-19 pages and files. Please note the content on these pages and files is no longer being updated and may be out of date.

Visit archive.cdc.gov for a historical snapshot of the COVID-19 website, capturing the end of the Federal Public Health Emergency on June 28, 2023.
Visit the dynamic COVID-19 collection to search the COVID-19 website as far back as July 30, 2021.
Last Reviewed Mar. 15, 2024
Last Updated Mar. 15, 2024
Source: National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), Division of Viral Diseases
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate
How helpful was this page?
    
Not helpfulVery helpful
home
COVID-19
About COVID-19
plus icon
Symptoms
Testing
Medical Conditions
Prevention
plus icon
Vaccines
plus icon
Treatments & Medications
Long COVID Basics
plus icon
Data & Surveillance
plus icon
Healthcare Workers
plus icon
Lab Professionals
plus icon
Health Departments
plus icon
Communication Resources
plus icon
email_03Get Email Updates
To receive email updates about COVID-19, enter your email address:

Email Address
Email Address
What's this?
About CDC
Contact Us
800-232-4636
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
Pinterest
Snapchat
Español
繁體中文
Tiếng Việt
한국어
Tagalog
Русский
العربية
Kreyòl Ayisyen
Français
Polski
Português
Italiano
Deutsch
日本語
فارسی
English
Accessibility
External Links
Privacy
Policies
No Fear Act
FOIA
OIG
USA.gov
Nondiscrimination
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Department of Health & Human Services
COVID-19 Web Archive