SKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXSECTION NAVIGATION
SEARCH
THE TIMES SALE
LOG IN

LIVEUpdates
21m ago
21m ago
Tracking the Polls
Biden-Trump Debates
Trump’s 2025 Plans
Issues Tracker
Campaign Tracker
State Results
Who’s Running for President in 2024?
By Martín González Gómez and Maggie AstorUpdated June 12, 2024

Leer en español
Democrats
Biden
Republicans
Trump
Independent and third-party
Kennedy
West
Stein
Oliver
Dropped out
Binkley
Burgum
Christie
DeSantis
Elder
Hurd
Hutchinson
Johnson
Pence
Ramaswamy
Scott
Suarez
Haley
Phillips
Palmer
Williamson
Not running
Larry Hogan (R), Joe Manchin (D), Mike Pompeo (R), Chris Sununu (R)
By Martín González Gómez and Maggie Astor

Share full article


There was no shortage of people running for president when the campaign began, all laboring under the shadow of the same two men who faced off in 2020: President Biden and former President Donald J. Trump.

But most of Mr. Trump’s Republican challengers ended their campaigns before a single vote was cast, and he quickly drove out the rest by winning all but two contests.

On the Democratic side, Mr. Biden had some nominal challengers but similarly dominated the field.

Number of candidates in the race over time
Nearly all challengers to Mr. Trump dropped out before Super Tuesday. Below, lighter lines show data from past election cycles starting in 1972.

Democrats
700days
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
5
10
15
20candidates
Biden
Biden
1 candidate
1 candidate

Super Tuesday
20202024
Republicans
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Trump
Trump
1 candidate
1 candidate

Iowa CaucusSuper Tuesday
20162024
Days before the general election
Source: New York Times reporting and Ballotpedia Note: Marianne Williamson suspended her campaign for the Democratic nomination on Feb. 7, 2024, but resumed her bid for office three weeks later.
More about the candidates
Find a candidate

Democrats
Joseph R. Biden Jr.
 Current president
 82 years old on Inauguration Day
President Biden has cast himself as a protector of democracy and a stabilizing force after the upheaval of the Trump administration.

Read more
Republicans Read more: Candidates on the issues ›
Donald J. Trump
 Former president and businessman
 78 years old on Inauguration Day
Former President Donald J. Trump is running to retake the office he lost in 2020, then denied losing to the point of inciting a mob of his supporters to attack the United States Capitol.

Read more
Independent and third-party
Robert F. Kennedy Jr.
 Anti-vaccine activist
 71 years old on Inauguration Day
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., a nephew of former President John F. Kennedy, is a prominent anti-vaccine activist. He initially ran for the Democratic nomination before announcing in October that he would run as an independent instead.

Read more
Cornel West
 Professor and progressive activist
 72 years old on Inauguration Day
Cornel West has taught at Yale, Princeton and Harvard and is currently a professor of philosophy at Union Theological Seminary. He is known for his progressive activism, including his sharp criticism of former President Barack Obama.

Read more
Jill Stein
 Doctor and activist
 74 years old on Inauguration Day
Jill Stein, a physician who ran for president on the Green Party ticket in 2012 and 2016, is seeking the party’s nomination for a third time. In a video announcing her campaign, she called for an “economic bill of rights” that would include a guaranteed right to employment, health care, housing, food and education, and also highlighted support for combating climate change and protecting abortion and transgender rights.

Read more
Chase Oliver
 Political activist
 39 years old on Inauguration Day
Chase Oliver, a left-leaning Libertarian who used to be a Democrat, narrowly won his party’s nomination in May. Mr. Oliver said he became politically active as an opponent of the Iraq War and describes himself as “armed and gay.” He opposes Israel’s actions in Gaza and wants to abolish the Federal Reserve.

Read more
Photo production by Jessica White and Amanda Cordero.

Share full article


Site Index
Site Information Navigation
© 2024 The New York Times Company
NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions
Tell us about yourself. Take the survey.

