Skip to main content
American Heart Association heart and torch logoAmerican Heart Association 100 Years logo
Heart Attack and Stroke Symptoms
Volunteer
ShopHeart
Healthy Living
Health Topics
Professionals
Get Involved
Ways to Give
About Us
Learn CPR
In Your Community
Home Health Topics Heart Attack About Heart Attacks Ischemic Heart Disease
Silent Ischemia and Ischemic Heart Disease
What is ischemia?
Ischemia is a condition in which blood flow (and thus oxygen) is restricted or reduced in a part of the body. Cardiac ischemia is decreased blood flow and oxygen to the heart muscle.

What is ischemic heart disease?
It's heart problems caused by narrowed heart arteries. When arteries are narrowed, less blood and oxygen reach the heart muscle. This is also called coronary artery disease and coronary heart disease. This can lead to heart attack.

Ischemia often causes chest pain or discomfort known as angina pectoris.



View an illustration of angina.

What is silent ischemia?
Many people have ischemic episodes without knowing it or having pain — silent ischemia. They may have a heart attack with no warning. People with angina also may have undiagnosed episodes of silent ischemia. People who have had previous heart attacks or those with diabetes are also at high risk for developing silent ischemia.

An exercise stress test or Holter monitor (a battery-operated portable tape recording that measures and records your electrocardiogram (ECG) continuously, usually for 24-48 hours) can often diagnose this problem. Other tests also may be used.

Written by American Heart Association editorial staff and reviewed by science and medicine advisors.
See our editorial policies and staff.

Last Reviewed: Dec 5, 2022

X formerly known as Twitter Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Email  Print
Heart Attack Tools and Resources
What Are the Warning Signs of Heart Attack? (PDF)
 
What is a Heart Attack? (PDF)
 
How Will I Recover? (PDF)
 
Heart Attack Discharge Worksheet (PDF)
 
Heart Attack Discharge Worksheet (Spanish) (PDF)
 
5 Ways to Lower Your Risk of a Second Heart Attack (PDF)
 
5 Ways to Lower Your Risk of a Second Heart Attack -  Spanish (PDF)
 
Cardiac Rehab Referral Card (PDF)
 
Cardiac Rehab Referral Card (Spanish) (PDF)
 
Common Heart Attack Warning Signs (PDF)
Heart Attack

About Heart Attacks

Acute Coronary Syndrome
Heart Attack vs Cardiac Arrest
Coronary Artery Dissection
Ischemic Heart Disease
Warning Signs of a Heart Attack

Angina (Chest Pain)

Understand Your Risks to Prevent a Heart Attack

Diagnosing a Heart Attack

Heart Attack Treatment

Life After a Heart Attack

Heart Attack Tools and Resources

Related Articles
senior woman with chest pain
Angina Pectoris (Stable Angina)
Interactive Cardiovascular Library Thumbnail image
Watch, Learn and Live
See your cardiovascular system in action with our interactive illustrations and animations.
Explore the Library
100 years bold hearts
Our mission is to be a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives. As we move into the second century of our work, we are advancing health and hope for everyone, everywhere.



*All health/medical information on this website has been reviewed and approved by the American Heart Association, based on scientific research and American Heart Association guidelines. Find more information on our content editorial process.

American Heart Association 100 Years Bold Hearts logo
National Center
7272 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231

Customer Service
1-800-AHA-USA-1
1-800-242-8721


Hours
Monday - Friday: 7 a.m. – 7 p.m. CT 
Saturday: 9 a.m. - 5 p.m. CT
Closed on Sundays

Tax Identification Number
13-5613797

About Us
About the AHA/ASA
Our Impact
Annual Report
AHA Financial Information
International Programs
Latest Heart and Stroke News
AHA/ASA Media Newsroom
Careers
Get Involved
Donate Now
Make a Memorial Gift
Ways to Give
Advocate
Volunteer
Go Red For Women
ShopHeart
ShopCPR
Our Sites
American Heart Association
American Stroke Association
CPR & ECC
Professional Heart Daily
More Sites
Facebook
Instagram
X formerly known as Twitter
Tik Tok
YouTube
LinkedIn
Pinterest
National Health Council
Better Business Bureau Accredited Charity
Charity Navigator
Secured by Sectigo
AHA Careers
Privacy Policy
Medical Advice Disclaimer
Copyright Policy
Accessibility Statement
Ethics Policy
Conflict of Interest Policy
Linking Policy
Whistleblower Policy
Content Editorial Guidelines
Diversity
Suppliers & Providers
State Fundraising Notices
Cookie Settings

©2024 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized use prohibited.
The American Heart Association is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization.
*Red Dress ™ DHHS, Go Red ™ AHA ; National Wear Red Day® is a registered trademark.